#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
knitr
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
The Pragmatics of Private Markets Investing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Karl Polen
\end_layout

\begin_layout Address
Karl Polen is the Chief Investment Officer of the Arizona State Retirement
 System
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

karlp@azasrs.gov or karl.polen@gmail.com
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

3300 N.
 Central, Phoenix, AZ 85016
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

(602) 240-2014
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Address

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The author shares perspectives and lessons learned from four decades experience
 in private markets investing.
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

Key Takeaways:
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

1.
 Private markets investing is business investing and you need to focus on
 the quality of the business approach in creating strategic advantage in
 the markets served.
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

2.
 Private markets investing is a hiring decision and you need to assess the
 quality of the organization under consideration for a strategy.
 Management should be expected to demonstrate an ability to not just remain
 healthy, but grow and improve through the tenure of your relationship with
 them.
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

3.
 Managing cost of fees is important, bot not sufficient to ensure success.
 Alignment of interest across a range of outcomes, not just the upside,
 should be given paramount importance in partnership structuring.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
pagebreak
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this paper I share views I have developed about investing in private
 markets during thirty years of private sector experience followed by ten
 years in an institutional environment.
\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
I have worked for the Arizona State Retirement System for the last ten years,
 initially as Head of Private Markets Investing and as CIO for the last
 4 years.
 While I work for ASRS as CIO, this work and the views it expresses are
 my own.
 The policies of ASRS are set in accordance with its governance policy and
 may be different from what is stated here.
 Any information about ASRS is drawn from public information readily available
 on its website.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

These views incorporate a framework for investment decision making and underwrit
ing of strategies and firms.
 The process for assessing strategies and firms is unavoidably qualitative
 and subjective.
 However, I also present some analytical methods that I think are useful
 in support of the decision process.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Institutional investors have adopted the use of private markets strategies
 in their portfolios at a rapidly increasing rate in recent decades.
 The markets themselves have grown commensurately to multi-trillion size.
 As the number of listed companies has declined, private markets have become
 difficult to ignore.
 This paper does not, however, attempt to justify the decision to invest
 in these markets or develop an approach to incorporating them in a strategic
 asset allocation analytical framework.
 It starts, instead, from a standpoint that those decisions have already
 been made.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When I need to explain the underwriting process for private markets investing,
 I use the metaphor of a three legged stool.
 One leg each for strategy, organization and track record.
 By strategy, I refer to business strategy.
 What market are you addressing; what is your competitive advantage and
 how do you think you will add value? As a critical step in the process,
 we assess the health of the asset management organization.
 Do they have the organizational depth and skills to implement the target
 strategy? Have the created a culture that will allow them to continue to
 grow and improve over the life of the investment? We examine track record
 as confirmatory evidence on the first two questions.
 Track record alone is a weak indicator of likely future success.
 Finally, we consider the terms of an investment partnership as to the appropria
teness of the costs associated with it and the reliability of the alignment
 of interest of the investor and investment manager.
 What follows is a more detailed discussion of these topics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Strategy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As investors we learn we learn about strategy in the context of strategic
 asset allocation; i.e.
 the proportion of assets allocated to risks and associated premia related
 to equities, rates, credit, real estate and so forth.
 These decisions are the most important determinant of outcomes, at least
 after the fact.
 As important as this is, we are using the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

strategy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in a different way.
 We are referring to business strategy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You can think of business strategy as an antonym to luck.
 It answers the question 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

how do we earn the profits we make.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 You earn them because somebody values what you do and you do it well.
 Strategy endures.
 Luck doesn't.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The history of private markets institutional investing goes back to the
 1980s and 1990s.
 In those days, mere liquidity was a strategy.
 When the market suffered dislocations, for example in the RTC crisis of
 the early 90s, private capital seized on opportunities that were wildly
 mispriced.
 The RTC saw its mission as rapidly resolving failed S&Ls and they auctioned
 the assets individually and in pools to a market that simply was not structural
ly organized to absorb the volume of assets delivered.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The extraordinary returns earned from these times attracted additional capital
 and a private equity and private credit industry has organized itself globally
 with trillions of investment capacity.
 Private capital is now deeply embedded in the structure of capital markets
 and an effective competitor to public markets.
 It used to be that once a company reached a billion or so in enterprise
 value, its only option to raise capital for growth was in public markets.
 Following various crises of the last thirty years, regulation of public
 companies and the increasing presence of activist shareholders has increased
 the cost of going public and the reduced the attractiveness of it.
 In the meantime, the availability of private capital and the competitiveness
 of private markets with multiple firms bidding on deals has made it feasible
 and efficient to finance firms to mid-cap and even large-cap range outside
 public markets.
 This is a self-reinforcing cycle leading to continued growth in private
 capital as investors seek access to these opportunities.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this context, liquidity and savvyness about discerning value and opportunity
 are still needed but no longer sufficient.
 The sheer size of private markets ensures competitive bidding for pretty
 much anything that comes to market.
 In order to continue to earn excess returns, the best private capital firms
 have invested in their firms to create ever deeper expertise in the markets
 they address.
 They use this expertise to create strategic advantage to generate or gain
 access to deals and to formulate and execute business strategy for companies
 or properties owned.
 This trend also drove firms to specialize.
 For all but the very largest firms, there was a need to select which markets
 they want to address in order to build teams to accomplish their objectives.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Markets can broadly be categorized as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

growth
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

value
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 markets.
 In growth markets, your goal is to accelerate the top line while optimizing
 operations to drive down unit costs enhancing profitability or creating
 a path to it.
 In value strategies, you rationalize operations in order to harvest cash
 flow.
 Practically any market offers opportunities to build businesses and make
 money.
 The question for the investor is whether the team you are evaluating is
 well prepared to tackle the issues presented by the strategy they are pursuing.
 In order to add value, the skills required will go well beyond financial
 deal-making skills.
 In private equity, operations teams are critical.
 If you are going to actually achieve 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

synergy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 benefits when combining two firms, you need to support the management teams
 in successfully completing the necessary integration.
 Specialized industry expertise is often essential, whether it's marketing
 and logistics expertise for consumer brands or geologists and engineers
 who can evaluate 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quality of rocks
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in oil and gas ventures.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Real estate and credit are special cases.
 Real estate delivers value to consumers through design.
 Real estate design is the province of architects and urban planners who
 study consumer preference and craft a strategy for building design responsive
 to location and environmental context that creates a strategic advantage
 in fulfilling its commercial purpose.
 Time and time again, we see well designed and operated buildings maintaining
 high occupancy and earning premium rents in markets and neighborhoods that
 otherwise would be regarded as highly competitive.
 Employment trends, the tastes of millenials and impacts of technology are
 rapidly changing what constitutes good design and risks of obsolescence
 in real estate are high.
 Value strategies of investing in older buildings at discount prices need
 to be evaluated carefully.
 Unlike other investment categories where scale is usually paramount, the
 fundamental attractiveness of real estate as an investment category is
 enhanced by the intensely local nature of markets creating the opportunity
 for competitive advantage and pricing power with a relatively small business.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Unlike equity strategies where value is created after the acquisition, credit
 strategies achieve their success mostly through their access to deal pipeline
 and discipline and diligence in deciding whether or not to make a loan.
 Credit firms must have sourcing operation with extensive relationships
 across the industry they serve.
 Lending decision require deep expertise in credit analysis including industry
 coverage teams.
 Once the loan is made, the die is largely cast.
 Nevertheless, active monitoring is extremely important.
 Rapid action in addressing a deteriorating credit can improve recovery
 rates.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The final test of strategy is consumer-centeredness.
 We started out by saying understanding strategy is similar to a firm grasp
 of the answer to how a firm earns its profits.
 If it's lucky or exploitative, it won't be sustainable.
 Firms have multiple constituencies and as firms mature, they evolve in
 how they embrace their responsibilities.
 For asset management firms, the first order customer is the asset owner
 which has entrusted them with a portion of their capital for management.
 The issues here are pretty straight-forward – the asset owner wants its
 money turned into more money together with some niceties like being kept
 informed on how things are going along the way.
 More to come on this when we discuss terms in a later section.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To distinguish themselves, firms must serve a broader customer set.
 Private equity firms serve the management teams of the companies they own.
 A software industry investor adds value if it has an internal consulting
 team with expertise in software development and marketing.
 Such a firm becomes a preferred partner getting a last look in auctions
 or even having the chance to buy businesses 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

off market
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 A middle market credit firm adds value through its reputation for reliably
 closing and fair dealing when conditions evolve for better or worse.
 Such a firm can achieve premium pricing and hold firm on other terms and
 covenants.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Additionally, these relationships create access to deal flow.
 A firm must demonstrate an ability to actually deploy capital, timely,
 in the amount raised and consistent with the parameters of the promised
 strategy.
 I am not put off by a firm's aspiration to grow and, realistically, that
 is a goal for any firm of quality.
 However, an asset manager should be prepared to demonstrate that their
 strategy is scalable within the bounds of their fund raising aspirations,
 without drift or deterioration in underwriting standards.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Every firm has a critical internal customer set in the people who work there.
 This is the topic of the next section.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Organization
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Once you select strategies to pursue, you need to hire teams to implement
 them.
 Private markets investing concerns itself principally with this hiring
 decision.
 Though we analyze prior investments, it isn't the same as securities analysis.
 When Warren Buffet drinks a Coca Cola and reads their financial statements
 and decides he likes it, he then can buy the stock and Coca Cola is what
 he gets.
 You can analyze the prior track record of a private equity firm all you
 want, but you don't get those deals.
 What you are evaluating is whether they have created a culture and process
 that adds value and assessing whether you think it is likely they will
 repeat that success.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You will start evaluating an organization simply by looking at the size
 and composition of the team.
 Is it big enough and does it contain the technical specialties necessary
 to implement the planned strategy.
 A relevant statistic is firm assets under management divided by employee
 headcount.
 From that information, you can calculate an estimate of the recurring revenue
 per employee.
 The revenue should be high enough to support the team allowing for continued
 growth and advancement.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Firm culture will be critical in the success of the firm and its investments.
 One of the biggest challenges for a private markets is dealing with situations
 where a firm deteriorates because of internal conflict, shifts in focus
 or unplanned transitions.
 These situations typically are associated with poor investment results
 and if you can screen out firms at risk for these outcomes, you will enhance
 your investment results.
 Founder leadership style establishes and guides the culture.
 In building a firm founders make a series of increasingly selfless decisions.
 The first decision is to found the firm in the first place.
 The founders have a fire in their belly to pursue something reflecting
 their unique take on strategy and build something which is their own.
 This first 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

at bat
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is critical – if you don't have enough early success to attract capital
 and talent, the firm never really gets off the ground.
 As the firm progresses, the founders are then faced with the task of transition
ing from deal culture to firm culture.
 Leadership style at this point becomes critical.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the fun things about being an investor in private markets is the
 opportunity to meet many founders and observe how they manage this journey.
 The best managers de-emphasize the personalities of the founders in order
 to build the culture of the firm.
 Leaders in this style see leadership as service and to a significant degree
 an antonym to authority.
 They build a culture reflecting a philosophy and discipline of business
 practice and then trust the culture.
 Decisions and responsibility are increasingly entrusted to the team as
 their skills and experience grow.
 The founders don't hold themselves out as final decision makers.
 Instead they monitor that appropriate discipline was observed in making
 the decision and that feedback loops are present to appropriately measure
 the outcome of the decision and learn from those outcomes.
 Teamwork is emphasized.
 Every individual understands her role and does not let down her colleagues
 with substandard, incomplete or tardy work.
 People learn to trust each other in the integrity and professionalism of
 their work.
 Leadership in this context serves the firm, the employees and the culture.
 The leaders accept financial rewards only after taking care of the team
 first.
 They are quick to credit the team for their work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Compensation and employment terms are important.
 This is where the rubber hits the road.
 While it may be the case that employees will be loyal to firms that create
 a rich employment experience full of challenge, team comraderie and joy
 from shared experience of success, this only goes so far and the firm will
 deteriorate if the riches created are not properly shared.
 Persons in authority who accept rewards for themselves without first taking
 care of their teams are creating an intrinsically toxic environment.
 As the firm evolves, if will develop formalized and for more senior personnel
 contractual arrangements for sharing profit.
 Careers are emphasized and career conversations about what this job means
 to each person occur regularly.
 The uniqueness of individuals is a source of strength for the culture.
 Succession planning and ownership of the asset management firm need to
 be addressed well in advance of need both to protect investors and to complete
 the bond with the next generation of managers who will succeed the founders.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The capital of an asset management firm is human capital.
 Founders who make the short term sacrifice of building a high quality culture
 that exists beyond them and will endure after them achieve more for themselves
 and the markets they serve than those with a narrower view of self interest.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Assessing these things is difficult for an investor, but important.
 Typical investment arrangements with these firms involve fund lives of
 ten to fifteen years.
 One sees firms that ossify or disintegrate in that time frame and contractual
 protections rarely provide adequate remedies.
 In my own case, I use a thought experiment to help myself with this decision
 – I have adult children and I ask myself if this firm is a place I would
 want them to work.
 Will they be continuously challenged with projects and duties of increasing
 complexity as their skills grow.
 Will they receive regular candid feedback and will they receive financial
 rewards commensurate with the value of their work.
 Will they advance in a career path suited to them providing opportunities
 for technical excellence or the chance lead a team or a business line.
 Will the culture, however demanding, avoid hazing rituals and allow them
 to grow as individuals with interests and relationships beyond work.
 If it's a good place to work where you'd be proud for your children to
 be associated with it, then it has a decent chance of surviving and thriving.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
TRACK RECORD
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why do we look at track record? Luck and randomness are everywhere and just
 because a firm has done well, it is far from certain it will continue to
 do so.
 In public markets, there is some evidence that strategies that have recently
 done well will deteriorate.
 In private markets, the evidence for persistence of performance is, at
 best, equivocal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We understand all that, but care about track record anyway.
 We care about it because it is the one unfudgeable and unspinnable piece
 of evidence we have that might help us assess whether the firm has created
 a quality culture and is pursuing a robust strategy.
 What follows is a somewhat detailed explanation for calculating performance
 metrics for private equity style investments where investments are illiquid
 and market timing is determined by an investment manager with a sequence
 of capital calls and distributions which are non-discretionary for the
 investor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk1, echo=FALSE, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

require(knitcitations) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

bib=read.bibtex('pme.bib') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

source('pme functions.r')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Traditional Methods of Performance Measurement
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Comparing private equity performance to public markets presents technical
 challenges.
 The usual way to compare two investments is with time weighted returns.
 This works with liquid investments where the investor can choose which
 assets to own and in what weight.
 For example, you can use time weighted returns to properly compare the
 performance of large cap stocks with small cap stocks over whatever time
 frame is of interest to you.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Private equity doesn't work the same way.
 PE investments are typically in the form of limited partnership interests
 with subscription agreements pursuant to which the financial sponsor has
 the right to control the amount and timing of capital which is called in
 to the partnership.
 So, the amount of capital deployed varies over time and the investor has
 no control over the timing of calls or distributions for the investment.
 In this context, time weighted return calculations are not useful in understand
ing the performance of a private equity investment because the variability
 in the amount of capital deployed will typically be very large.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The traditional performance metrics for private equity are DPI, TVPI and
 IRR.
 DPI stands for distributions as a percent of invested and is calculated
 as the sum of distributions received divided by the sum of capital contribution
s made.
 TVPI is "total value as a percent of invested" and calculates the "total
 value" as the sum of distributions plus the value of the unrealized assets
 still owned by the partnership divided, again, by the sum of the capital
 calls.
 IRR is the internal rate of return, customarily expressed as an annual
 interest rate, calculated on the cash flows with the capital calls expressed
 as negative numbers and including the final cash flow as part of the time
 series for the calculation.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These traditional measures collectively give a good sense of the performance
 of a particular PE investment and allow you to compare private equity investmen
ts to each other.
 Data services tracking private equity use a combination of these metrics
 to rank performance in "quartiles".
 They customarily group funds to control for market context in "vintages"
 based on the year the partnership began investing.
 So, a 2006 vintage fund which invested across the global financial crisis
 and earned a 10% IRR might be a top quartile performer for that vintage,
 while the same IRR might be below average for a 2009 vintage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Public Market Equivalent methods 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Controlling for market context by vintage is useful but still crude because
 there is a lot of variability of patterns of calling and returning capital
 from fund to fund.
 A number of authors proposed methods for this, but Steve Kaplan and Antoinette
 Schoar wrote an influential article exploring private equity performance
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Kaplan2005"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 .
 In this article they formulated a method for calculating private equity
 performance as a "public market equivalent" which we will refer to as KSPME.
 KSPME is calculated as ratio of benefits to costs and a value greater than
 1 indicates performance above the opportunity cost benchmark.
 The calculation is illustrated in the following formulas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The required data are a time series of capital calls 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$C_t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

, a time series distributions 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$D_t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

, a final value at time 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$n$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 of 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$V_n$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 and a time series of dividend adjusted market indices 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$M_t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 You calculate a future value factor as the ratio of the market index at
 time 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$n$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 divided by the index at prior times 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$FV_t=
\backslash
frac{M_n}{M_t}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You then multiply (pair-wise for each of the values) the future value factor
 times calls and distributions 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$C_{FV}=C_t * FV_t$$ ; $$D_{FV} = D_t * FV_t$$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You now have what you need to calculate
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$KSPME = 
\backslash
frac{
\backslash
Sigma D_{FV} + V_n}{
\backslash
Sigma C_{FV}}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
KSPME is a wealth measure reflecting how much extra money you have by investing
 in the private equity fund compared to an alternative public markets investment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gredil, Griffiths and Stucke have proposed an additional metric, called
 "Direct Alpha", which converts KSPME to annual rate.
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Gredil2014"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
 KSPME tells you how much extra money you made and Direct Alpha tells the
 annual rate at which you made it.
 Direct Alpha is calculated as the IRR of a time series constructed by combining
 the future value adjusted calls (as negative numbers), distributions and
 the final value.
 So, it uses exactly the same data as KSPME but with different calculations
 to reduce the data to a single measurement.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$Direct Alpha = 
\backslash
log{(1+IRR(-C_{FV},D_{FV},V_n))}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you have an IRR of a private equity investment 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$IRR_{PE}$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 calculated as a discrete annual return, you can then calculate an 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$IRR_M$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 that you would have earned by investing in a market index with the same
 timing of investments and withdrawals as the calls and distributions of
 the private equity investment.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$
\backslash
log{(1+IRR_M)} = 
\backslash
log{(1+IRR_{PE})} - DirectAlpha$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
KSPME and Direct Alpha supplement the traditional private equity performance
 measurements with methods that allow you to compare the private returns
 to public returns.
 In effect, these methods accurately measure the opportunity cost of public
 market investments foregone with the allocation to private markets.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Illustration of calculations of private equity performance measurements
 in R
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For those interested, we provide here detatiled mechanics for calculating
 PME.
 The code and data are found on the earlier referenced Github site.
 We work from a hypothetical data set of private equity cash flows and valuation
s with dates for each entry.
 Although this is a limited data set covering only four investments, the
 exact same code will work on a large data set with thousands of entries
 for hundreds of investments.
 That's the beauty of coding – the algorithm doesn't grow in size simply
 because the data set has.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First, we read in the data and show its initial form.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk2, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(tseries) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(zoo) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=read.csv('pedata.csv') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata$date=as.Date(pedata$date,format='%m/%d/%Y') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

unique(pedata$fund) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

head(pedata)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now calculate a combined cash flow and valuation for the portfolio and
 an additional investment labeled 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Total
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=split(pedata,pedata$type) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

total.c=data.frame(fund="Total",
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		aggregate(value~date,pedata$C,sum),type="C")
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

total.v=data.frame(fund="Total",
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		aggregate(value~date,pedata$V,sum),type="V")  
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=rbind(pedata$C,pedata$V,total.c,total.v) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

tail(pedata)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@ 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next we download the Russell 2000 index from Yahoo finance.
 R can handle other data services, but we use Yahoo because it's available
 to anybody at no charge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk3, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

r2k=get.hist.quote('^RUT',min(pedata$date)-5,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		max(pedata$date)+5, quote='AdjClose',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		provider='yahoo',retclass='zoo',quiet=TRUE)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

r2k=na.locf(merge(r2k,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		zoo(,seq(start(r2k),end(r2k),by='day')),all=TRUE))
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@ 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{merge}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 the index data with the private equity data set so that each entry in the
 data set has its related market index value.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk7>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

r2k=data.frame(date=time(r2k),index=as.numeric(r2k)) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=merge(pedata,r2k) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

head(pedata)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{split}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 the data set in to a list of data frames, one for each fund and the total
 portfolio.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk6>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pelist=split(pedata,pedata$fund) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

names(pelist) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@ 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I've written a function called 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{pe.performance}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 which processes data in the format of each of the data frames in 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{pelist}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 The code for all the functions used in this post are listed at the end
 of the post.
 Having done the hard work of preparing the data for analysis, we can now
 calculate the performance statistics with only two lines of code.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats=lapply(pelist,pe.performance) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats.df=data.frame(lapply(stats,unlist)) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

round(stats.df,3) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@  
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here is an example of a way to graphically present the results.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk4, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, fig.width=10,fig.height=7,tidy=FALSE>>=
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats.df2=as.data.frame(t(as.matrix(stats.df)))
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats.df2=data.frame(name=colnames(stats.df),stats.df2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(ggplot2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ggplot(stats.df2,aes(x=ind.irr,y=irr,label=name,colour=kspme))+
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	geom_text()+
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	xlab("Market Return")+ 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	ylab("Fund IRR")+ 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	geom_abline(intercept=0,slope=1)+ 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	ggtitle("Private Equity Performance")
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
PME methods are not a magic bullet, but they are very useful.
 Prior to these methods, it was difficult to benchmark performance.
 PME methods provide a rigorous tool for assessing performance relative
 to market which is an essential starting point for assessing the quality
 of a firm and its strategies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Consideration of skewness
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One last topic on performance assessment deserves mention.
 As is well known, stock market returns are skewed with a few outliers contribut
ing disproportionately to performance.
 Hank Bessembinder has shown that only 4% of stocks have contributed substantial
ly all the outperformance of the stock market since the great depression.
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Bessembinder2019"
literal "false"

\end_inset

We'd like to see a similar positive outlier type of skewness in our private
 markets investments.
 The data sets are too small in private markets for any pretension of fancy
 statistics.
 I prefer something I call a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

slugging percentage
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which is simply the percentage of deals that have returned 3X or more of
 the initial investment.
 We then compare that to the percentage of deals that have lost money and
 if it's comfortably larger, we have evidence of the sort of skewness we
 are looking for.
 In the next section, we will analyze the effect of incentive compensation
 on the skewness of net returns and you will see that positively gross returns
 are needed to balance things out for the investor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code

\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
COST AND PARTNERSHIP TERMS
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Private equity structures are complicated and difficult to analyze.
 We present here a quick and dirty analyzer of general partner compensation
 in real estate and private equity partnerships.
 It analyzes the outcomes across a range of performance scenarios in single
 period investment context.
 It is useful for analyzing the sharing of income between the GP and investors
 as income varies.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Background 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Real estate and private equity investments are typically owned in a partnership
 which includes a general partner (the "sponsor") and limited partners ("investo
rs").
 The sponsor organizes the investment, recruits the investors and manages
 the assets.
 The general partner is typically compensated with an asset management fee
 and an incentive fee.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The asset management fee is usually stated as a percent per annum of assets
 under management.
 This can be either as a percent of "commited" capital or "invested" capital.
 In the former case, the fee is earned based on the amount the investors
 commit from the inception of the partnership without regard to when the
 capital is called.
 If the asset management fee is based on invested capital, then the fee
 is calculated only on capital which has been called.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The asset management fee is generally not contingent on performance, but
 on occasion investors can negotiate a deferral of a portion of an asset
 management fee until a minimum investment hurdle rate of return is achieved.
 There is a great deal of variation in these arrangements and a person tasked
 with analyzing a partnership will need to refer to the partnership documents.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this post we only consider the case of asset management fees on invested
 capital, but we allow a portion of the fee to be deferred based on performance.
 In a later post, we will consider more complex structures in a multi-period
 project environment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The incentive fee ("carry") is typically stated as a percent of profits.
 Profits are normally defined as the gross profits of the investments after
 returning partnership expenses including the asset management fee.
 Usually, a hurdle rate of return must be achieved before sharing begins.
 So, a typical deal might be stated as "20% carry over an 8% pref with a
 50% catchup".
 This means that the partnership has to earn at least 8% return before the
 sponsor earns any carry.
 Above an 8% return, the sponsor gets half the profit (i.e.
 the catchup is 50%) until the ratio of profit split is 20% to sponsor.
 Thereafter, the profits are split 80% to the investors and 20% to the sponsor.
 Incentive fees of 20% over an 8% hurdle are nearly universal in private
 equity.
 Although the catchup is negotiable, somewhere in the 50% to 100% range
 is typical.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Real estate deals have greater variation.
 Many real estate deals have multiple layers, but no catchup.
 So, a real estate deal might be stated as "20 over 8, 30 over 12 and 50
 over 20".
 Stated this way, sponsor starts sharing 20% of profits once the investor
 earned an 8% return, switching to 30% of profits once the investor has
 earned a 12% return and 50% of profits once the investor has earned a 20%
 return.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Private Equity Example
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's revisit the typical private equity structure ("20 over 8 with a 50%
 catchup").
 We will add a 2% asset management fee and consider the sharing of cash
 in the context of an investment with a hold period of exactly one year.
 We will now step through, in agonizing detail, each of the calculations
 for profit sharing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Level 0 -- the investment 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<PE1, echo=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

inv=100 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

am=2 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

capital=inv+am 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pref=capital*.08 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@  
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Invest $100 in an asset.
 In addition, the investor has to pay the asset management fee of $2.
 So, they have invested $102
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
level 1 -- return of capital
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{capital}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 goes to pay back the investor's capital -- 
\backslash
$
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{capital}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 cumulative cash, 2% gross return, 0% net return
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
level 2 -- pay pref
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The next 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{pref}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 dollars goes to cover the "pref" of 8%.
 $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{capital+pref}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 cumulative cash.
 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{round(100*(capital+pref-inv)/inv,1)}
\end_layout

\end_inset

% gross return, 8% net return
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
level 3 -- catchup
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now start splitting 50/50 until the sponsor has 20% of the distributed
 profit
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here we have a simple algebra problem
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We are looking for a value of 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$x$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 where
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$
\backslash
frac{.5x}{
\backslash
Sexpr{pref}+x}=.2$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's solve for 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$x$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$x=
\backslash
Sexpr{.4*pref}+.4x$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$.6x=
\backslash
Sexpr{.4*pref}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$x=
\backslash
frac{
\backslash
Sexpr{.4*pref}}{.6} = 
\backslash
Sexpr{round(.4*pref/.6,2)}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<PE2, echo=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

x=round(.4*pref/.6,2)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, the next 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{x}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 dollars are distributed 50/50.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At this point, $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{capital+pref+x}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 has been distributed, of which $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{round(.5*x,2)}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 went to the sponsor as incentive fee.
 The gross return is 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{round(100*(-1+((capital+pref+x)/inv)),1)}
\end_layout

\end_inset

% and the investor has received a net return of 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{round(100*(-1+((capital+pref+(.5*x))/100)),1)}
\end_layout

\end_inset

%.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
level 4 -- parri passu
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Remaining cash is distributed 80/20.
 Suppose the asset is sold for $130.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<PE3,echo=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

price=130 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

profit=price-inv 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

grossroi=round(100*profit/inv,1) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

lpshare=.8*(price-capital) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

lproi=round(100*lpshare/capital,1) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

gpshare=.2*(price-capital)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The limited partner receives $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{capital}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 return of capital plus $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{lpshare}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 The sponsor receives $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{gpshare}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 incentive fee in addition to the $
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{am}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 it received as an asset management fee.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The gross return on the investment is 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{grossroi}
\end_layout

\end_inset

%.
 The net return to the investor is 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{lproi}
\end_layout

\end_inset

%.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the github site we've provided a function called 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{waterfall}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 that automates these calculations.
 We illustrate its use for the private equity structure we have just stepped
 through.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe4,echo=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

source('waterfallqd.r')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

peinv=100 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pecap=102 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

dmat.pe=data.frame(am=0,pref=(.08*pecap),catchup=.5,carry=.2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ans.pe=waterfall(dmat.pe,ret=seq(100,130,.1),
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	invcost=peinv,capital=pecap) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here is a plot that shows the share going to sponsor and investor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe6,fig.width=7, fig.height=5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

plot(ans.pe$grossreturn,ans.pe$grossreturn,type='l',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	col='red',xlab='Gross Return',ylab='Return')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

lines(ans.pe$grossreturn,ans.pe$netreturn,type='l',col='blue') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

legend('topleft',legend=c('Gross Return','Net Return'),
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	col=c('red','blue'),lwd=1) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This plot shows the share of profit going to the GP on the margin.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe7,fig.width=7, fig.height=5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

deltaprofit=diff(ans.pe$grossreturn) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

deltagp=diff(ans.pe$grossreturn-ans.pe$netreturn) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

gpcut=100*(deltagp/deltaprofit-.02) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

plot(ans.pe$grossreturn[-1],gpcut, 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	main=('Marginal Share of Return to Sponsor'), 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	xlab='Gross Return', ylab='Percent',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	type='l',col='blue')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As you can see, the share to the GP increases to 50% during the catchup
 phase.
 It then drops to 20% for returns above the breakeven where the GP has 20%
 of the cumulative profits.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Real Estate Structure Example
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's do the same for the real estate example where the incentive fee is
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

20 over 8, thirty over 12 and 50 over 20
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 In this case, we illustrate where there is a 2% asset management fee but
 half the fee is deferred until the investor has achieved an 8% return.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe8>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

reinv=100 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

recap=101 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

dmat.re=data.frame(am=c(0,1,0),pref=c(.08,.12,.20)*recap,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	catchup=c(0,0,0),carry=c(.2,.3,.5))
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ans.re=waterfall(dmat.re,ret=seq(100,130,.1),invcost=reinv,capital=recap)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here is a plot that shows the share going to sponsor and investor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe9,fig.width=7, fig.height=5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

plot(ans.re$grossreturn,ans.re$grossreturn,type='l',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	col='red',xlab='Gross Return',ylab='Return')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

lines(ans.re$grossreturn,ans.re$netreturn,type='l',col='blue') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

legend('topleft',legend=c('Gross Return','Net Return'),
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	col=c('red','blue'),lwd=1) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This plot shows the share of profit going to the GP on the margin.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<pe10,fig.width=7, fig.height=5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

deltaprofit=diff(ans.re$grossreturn) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

deltagp=diff(ans.re$grossreturn-ans.re$netreturn) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

gpcut=100*deltagp/deltaprofit 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

plot(ans.re$grossreturn[-1],gpcut, 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	main=('Marginal Share of Return to Sponsor'), 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	xlab='Gross Return', ylab='Percent',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	type='l',col='blue')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As you can see, the GP share spikes when they recover their share of the
 deferred management fee, then follows the stairstep of 20%, 30% and 50%
 shares of profit above the hurdle rates delivered to the investor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These calculations are tricky and a source of endless frustration for analysts
 entering the profession.
 For those willing to suffer learning a bit of coding, functions like the
 one provided can help.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Consideration of skewness
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We will now use the waterfall function to analyze the skewness of net returns
 in a private equity structure a 1.5% management fee and incentive of 20%
 over an 8% preferred return with an 80% catchup.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<skew1>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

dmat.df=data.frame(am=1.5,pref=8,catchup=.8,carry=.2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ret=100+seq(-20,30,.1) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

wat=waterfall(dmat.df,ret) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Calculating net returns given a probability distribution assumption for
 gross returns
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Suppose we think gross returns are normally distributed, with a mean of
 15% and standard deviation of 15%.
 How are the net returns distributed? The below code makes these calculations
 and presents a comparative density function.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<skew2>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

mu=15 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

sd=15 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ret.seq=seq(mu-3*sd,mu+3*sd,.1) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ret.den=dnorm(ret.seq,mu,sd) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ret.count=round(1000*ret.den) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ret2=100+rep(ret.seq,ret.count) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

wat2=waterfall(dmat.df,ret2)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

with(wat2,plot(density(netreturn),col='blue',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	main='Return Density',xlab='Gross Return')) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

with(wat2,lines(density(grossreturn),col='red')) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

legend('topleft',legend=c('Gross Return','Net Return'),
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	col=c('red','blue'),lwd=1)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<skew3, echo=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

#with(wat2,plot(ecdf(netreturn),col='blue',pch=20, main='Cumulative Density',xla
b='Gross Return')) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

#lines(ret.seq,pnorm(ret.seq,mu,sd),col='red',lwd=3) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

#legend('topleft',legend=c('Gross Return','Net Return'),col=c('red','blue'),lwd=
3)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As you can see, the net returns are skewed to the low return side if you
 assume normally distributed gross returns.
 This is why we are looking for managers with a track record for positive
 skewness in their gross returns.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next we show the distribution of fees with a vertical dotted line at the
 mean fee.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<skew4>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

fee=wat2$grossreturn-wat2$netreturn 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

mean.fee=mean(fee) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

plot(density(fee,from=min(fee)),col='purple',lwd=2, 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	main='Fee Distribution', xlim=c(1,14))
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

abline(v=mean.fee,lty='dotted',col='purple') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It you want an estimate of what your fees are likely to be, this is a way
 to calculate it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Fee Effectiveness
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As part of evaluating an investment program, you will inevitably be asked
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

did you receive value for the fees you paid?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I think the best way to look at this is by considering fees as a percent
 of excess profits.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<ce1,message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, echo=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(ggplot2,quietly=TRUE,verbose=FALSE) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's setup a PE investment with market standard terms of 1.5% asset management
 fee, 20% carry over an 8% hurdle with an 80% catchup.
 First we show a plot the fee as a function of gross return.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<ce2,warning=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

dmat.pe=data.frame(am=1.5,pref=8,catchup=.8,carry=.2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ans.pe=waterfall(dmat.pe,ret=seq(100,130,.1)) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

df=data.frame(Gross_Return=ans.pe$grossreturn,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	Net_Return=ans.pe$netreturn) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

df$Fee=df$Gross_Return-df$Net_Return 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

bench=6 #asuumed near term public market returns
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

df$Excess_Return=df$Gross_Return-bench 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

df$Excess_Return[df$Excess_Return<=0]=NA 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

df$Slice_to_GP=pmin(1,df$Fee/df$Excess_Return) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ggplot(df,aes(x=Gross_Return,y=Fee))+geom_line() 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now we show a plot of the fee as a percent of the excess return.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<ce3,warning=FALSE>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ggplot(df,aes(x=Gross_Return,y=Slice_to_GP)) + geom_line()
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Negotiating terms to manage cost
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The primary fee cost drivers in private equity type investment are the asset
 management and incentive fees.
 If you are trying to negotiate and reduce cost, here are some suggestions
 on where to direct your focus.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pay close attention to the catch-up provisions.
 Assuming your incentive fee is 20 over 8 and a reasonably successful investment
 program, the catchup will add 1.6% per year to the investment cost; i.e.
 the 20% incentive rate times the 8% hurdle.
 While this would be considered market standard in many contexts, it may
 at times be negotiable.
 The catchup has the biggest impact in the return band of 9% to 12% gross
 returns, where the catchup is paid.
 If this is an interemediate return strategy (as many real estate and credit
 strategies will be) where the expected returns are within that band, you
 need to consider whether this is acceptable to you.
 Negotiated solutions might be elimination of the catchup, possibly in considera
tion for a lower hurdle or the addition of higher incentive structures for
 exceptional performance as in the real estate structure described above.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Asset management fees are charged on either 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

committed
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

invested
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 capital.
 In the former case you pay a fee on the full amount of capital committed
 whether or not it has been called.
 Assuming investments are made ratably over the first three years of the
 partnership, this adds 1.5 times the annual fee rate over the life of the
 fund.
 Assuming an annual fee rate of 1.5% and weighted average duration of investments
 of eight years, the annual additional cost is a little less then 30bp per
 year.
 This is a fraction of the cost of the catchup, but still important.
 You need to keep in mind the whole picture.
 If your manager is smaller, they may need the early revenue to support
 a proper team for your strategy and you might better serve yourself by
 focusing on other areas for cost savings.
 But compromises may be available in the form of reduced fees on committed
 capital or performance based fees that link fees to achieved operational
 results.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, you should pay careful attention to what services are funded by
 the asset management fees and what services are charged as additional fund
 expenses to the partnership or charged to the deals.
 Read the manager's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

ADV
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 forms filed with the SEC.
 There is a lot of useful disclosure here.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
When Alignment of Interest Fails
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
By sharing profits with an asset manager, you achieve alignment of interest
 with them.
 At least while things are going well.
 The system falls apart with underperforming investments.
 With underperforming investments there is no incentive for the manager
 to wrap up the partnership.
 In fact, the manager is better off avoiding asset sales to continue the
 asset management fees and for the option value on the incentive fee in
 case the asset recovers.
 The investor may well prefer to sell and recover their capital from an
 underperforming investment in order to move on to the next thing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The situation is exacerbated when incentive fees are paid on a deal by deal
 basis.
 In that case if the manager has sold profitable deals early in the partnership
 and collected incentive fees for them, they may owe the partnership money
 for a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clawback
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 on liquidation of the partnership.
 This arises when fees initially advanced for early deals are higher than
 ultimately earned on the partnership as a whole.
 This provides a powerful additional incentive to delay final liquidation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For an investor in a program constructed of traditional closed end fund
 partnership interests there is little defense against these problems other
 than a well diversified portfolio with multiple managers, strategies and
 vintages.
 In that portfolio structure any problems will be mitigated and you can
 gradually weed out any managers who handle tough situations poorly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, if you are a larger investor you may be able to structure investments
 as large 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

separate accounts
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 on custom terms.
 In those structures, you may be able to negotiate provisions in favor of
 the investor for discretionary termination of investment periods, custom
 mandatory investment criteria and ability to direct liquidation of all
 or part of the assets.
 This approach is much more management intensive and requires specialized
 expertise to implement, but can add significant value in reduced cost and
 reliably aligned interests.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One cautionary remark on larger alternate investment structures is that
 just being larger and just reducing fees isn't enough to produce better
 results.
 A number of larger investors have pursued 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

co-invest sidecar
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 structures where they get investment allocations side by side with a traditiona
l investment fund at reduced or no fees.
 The criteria for investment allocation vary, but generally larger deals
 are allocated partly to the co-invest vehicles.
 Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar analyzed a large database of investments
 in these types of alternate vehicles and concluded that the alternate structure
s underperformed the related fund investments for many investors.
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Schoar2018"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 If you are going to pursue alternate and larger structures you will need
 to mitigate the risk of increased concentration through an appropriate
 partnership structure with adequate rights to ensure strategy discipline
 and liquidity rights to end investment periods and/or liquidate investments
 in the investor's discretion.
 The rewards can be greater with strategic relationship when they are well
 conceived and well managed, but the approach is not without risk and is
 not advised for investors without the requisite experience to diligize
 the strategy and properly structure the legal arrangement.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Information rights
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An area of ongoing frustration for me has been the quality and timeliness
 of information delivered to investors.
 While some sponsors do an excellent job, there are many who fall short.
 With advances in technology, accounting systems have rapidly moved toward
 real time dashboard type environments.
 Private equity shouldn't be any different.
 Investors should have access to real financial statements for each of the
 portfolio investments, prepared in accordance with GAAP consistently applied
 and delivered promptly.
 Additionally, there should be management discussion including a set of
 key performance indicators relevant to the deal and compared to initial
 underwriting expectations.
 With this information, an investor could know if an investment is going
 well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is actually delivered to investors is far too often partial information,
 not consistently presented from quarter to quarter and heavily spun by
 the firm's marketing department.
 It's puzzling to me that many asset managers do not find it relevant to
 strive for excellence in this area in order to add value to their investors.
 In a separate account arrangement, this can be addressed and the manager
 will not incur any additional cost because of it.
 If the manager is competent enough to earn your investment, they already
 have this information and just need to share it with you.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
THE UPSHOT
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When I started to write this paper, I thought it was going to be about the
 quantitative methods.
 I've written code which I believe could be a minor, but useful addition
 to the field.
 It quickly dawned on me that this would create the wrong impression, as
 though implementing these quantitative tricks would lead to a successful
 investment program.
 So, I changed the focus to describe the decision process that the quantitative
 methods are serving.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The most important determinant of investment success are strategy selection
 and investment manager hiring decisions.
 Private markets investing is business investing.
 Viable strategies exist in every industry and may be growth or value oriented.
 It's incumbent on the investor to consider the business propositions carefully
 and assess whether they add value and create strategic advantage in addressing
 a viable market.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Manager hiring decisions are key to successfully implementing the strategies
 you have selected.
 You need to assess the fit of the organization to the strategy – the organizati
on needs depth and expertise in the industries, products and managerial
 disciplines needed by the strategy.
 The organization needs to be healthy with a strong and motivated team.
 The PME methods discussed here provide a rigorous way to assess whether
 a manager has in fact added value.
 But that measurement is only useful in support of your assessment that
 an organization is well suited to implement a strategy you have chosen
 to pursue.
 If you flip the order and conclude something like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the PME was good, the strategy and the firm must be good
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, you are (in my opinion) making a mistake.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Negotiation of terms matters.
 The best way to think about cost is as a percent of excess return and we
 have presented methods for analyzing and understanding cost.
 Minimization of cost is not the goal.
 Indeed, if you are successful in selecting strategies and management teams
 your absolute cost will be higher because you will pay more in incentive
 fees.
 You need to negotiate fees keeping in mind the big picture – you want to
 encourage and support your partners to build and maintain high quality
 teams and the fees paid need to be consistent with that.
 The mix and timing of fees paid needs to be logical for the firm you have
 chosen as your partner.
 But when the dust settles, you want the fees to bear a reasonable relationship
 to excess returns earned.
 As the investor you are taking essentially all of the risk and need to
 retain a fair share of the reward.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How has this worked out for ASRS? I've consciously said very little about
 my employer.
 But I've worked at ASRS for ten years mostly as Head of Private Markets
 Investing and the last four years as CIO.
 We have built a private markets program consisting of real estate, private
 equity and credit that now amounts to about 40% of our fund and is targeted
 to be about 50% of the fund in coming years.
 Over that ten year period, the private markets investments have exceeded
 their benchmarks with annual excess returns for the ten year period of
 1.7% for private equity, 2.7% for real estate and 5.1% for credit.
 In the most recent year ended June 30, 2019, the excess returns were 7.5%
 for private equity, 3.7% for real estate and 2.3% for credit
\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
The benchmarks are ODCE for real estate, Russell 2000 for private equity
 and the LSTA leveraged loan index + 250bp for credit.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 ASRS has made extensive use of large separate accounts and some direct
 investments in implementing its real estate and credit program.
 These alternate structures have outperformed commingled fund vehicles and
 provide the additional benefit of much closer market engagement providing
 opportunity for building greater expertise and honing of skills.
 These excess returns have added over $2 billion of value to the ASRS trust
 fund and contributed to the overall performance of ASRS which has placed
 it consistenly among the top quartile of public pension plans.
 
\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Detailed information about ASRS investment performance is found in reports
 to the board investment committee and posted on the ASRS website at 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "azasrs.gov/content/board-and-committee-meetings"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'd like to close with some thoughts about research and potential reform.
 In the research area, the quantitative research and introduction of techniques
 (notably PME) is useful.
 But more organizational oriented research would help.
 Are there characteristics of firms (such as growth, sharing of carry, managemen
t of careers) that can be associated with higher likelihood of success?
 On the industry side, the near universality of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

20 over 8
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as an incentive structure should be questioned.
 Fund sponsors rightly point out that the 8% hurdle may not be appropriate
 in a 2% treasury world.
 Incentive compensation linked to excess return relative to market indices
 may be an improvement and use of PME methods in measuring excess performance
 appropriate.
 Reform is needed to improve alignment on underperforming funds.
 The languishing of out-of-the-money funds is common and creates the appearance
 they are being exploited for fees.
 Investors need remedies and structures to address this.
 Finally, progress in the quality and timeliness of information delivered
 to investors would be a great boon to them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thank you for reading this article! I hope you found it useful.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "pme"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
