#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
knitr
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
The Pragmatics of Private Markets Investing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Karl Polen
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction and Background
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This paper discusses quantitative and other methods which may be useful
 in structuring a private markets investing program.
 Private markets approaches have grown dramatically in recent decades with
 multi-trillion dollar markets available through vehicles sponsored by groups
 marketing to the institutional and, increasingly, the high net worth community.
 These investments pose unique challenges for those charged with managing
 them requiring methods specialized for the structure of the investments.
 A selection of these methods is presented here and code for implementing
 them is provided in an accompanying Github site.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This article refers to experience at the Arizona State Retirement System
 where the author is the Chief Investment Officer.
\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
While I work for ASRS as CIO, this work and the views it expresses are my
 own.
 The policies of ASRS are set in accordance with its governance policy and
 may be different from what is stated here.
 Any information about ASRS is drawn from public information readily available
 on its website.
 As a matter of style, I use 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

we
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 rather than 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

I
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in the article.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

We
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 refers to myself and like-minded people engaged in institutional private
 markets investing, not necessarily to ASRS.
\end_layout

\end_inset

As it was building its private markets investing program, ASRS found a dearth
 of tools for performance measurement and cost analysis.
 While commercially available tools for performance assessment have increased
 markedly in recent years, there is still a need for better tools to understand
 cost.
 This article presents some possible approaches to address these needs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Strategy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As investors we learn we learn about strategy in the context of strategic
 asset allocation; i.e.
 the proportion of assets allocated to risks and associated premia related
 to equities, rates, credit, real estate and so forth.
 These decisions are the most important determinant of outcomes, at least
 after the fact.
 As important as this is, we are using the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

strategy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in a different way.
 We are referring to business strategy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You can think of business strategy as an antonym to luck.
 It answers the question 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

how do we earn the profits we make.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 You earn them because somebody values what you do and you do it well.
 Strategy endures.
 Luck doesn't.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The history of private markets institutional investing goes back to the
 1980s and 1990s.
 In those days, mere liquidity was a strategy.
 When the market suffered dislocations, for example in the RTC crisis of
 the early 90s, private capital seized on opportunities that were wildly
 mispriced.
 The RTC saw its mission as rapidly resolving failed S&Ls and they auctioned
 the assets individually and in pools to a market that simply was not structural
ly organized to absorb the volume of assets delivered.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The extraordinary returns earned from these times attracted additional capital
 and a private equity and private credit industry has organized itself globally
 with investment capacity measured in trillions of dollars.
 Private capital is now deeply embedded in the structure of capital markets
 and an effective competitor to public markets.
 It used to be that once a company reached a billion or so in enterprise
 value, its only option to raise capital for growth was in public markets.
 Following various crises of the last thirty years, regulation of public
 companies and the increasing presence of activist shareholders has increased
 the cost of going public and the reduced the attractiveness of it.
 In the meantime, the availability of private capital and the competitiveness
 of private markets with multiple firms bidding on deals has made it feasible
 and efficient to finance firms to mid-cap and even large-cap range outside
 public markets.
 This is a self-reinforcing cycle leading to continued growth in private
 capital as investors seek access to these opportunities.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this context, liquidity and savvyness about discerning value and opportunity
 are still needed but no longer sufficient.
 The sheer size of private markets ensures competitive bidding for pretty
 much anything that comes to market.
 In order to continue to earn excess returns, the best private capital firms
 have invested in their firms to create ever deeper expertise in the markets
 they address.
 They use this expertise to create strategic advantage to generate or gain
 access to deals and to formulate and execute business strategy for companies
 or properties owned.
 This trend also drove firms to specialize.
 For all but the very largest firms, there was a need to select which markets
 they want to address in order to build teams to accomplish their objectives.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Markets can broadly be categorized as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

growth
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

value
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 markets.
 In growth markets, your goal is to accelerate the top line while optimizing
 operations to drive down unit costs enhancing profitability or creating
 a path to it.
 In value strategies, you rationalize operations in order to harvest cash
 flow.
 Practically any market offers opportunities to build businesses and make
 money.
 The question for the investor is whether the team you are evaluating is
 well prepared to tackle the issues presented by the strategy they are pursuing.
 Our view is that the skills required go well beyond financial deal-making
 skills.
 In private equity, operations teams are critical.
 If you are going to actually achieve 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

synergy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 benefits when combining two firms, you need to support the management teams
 in successfully completing the necessary integration.
 Specialized industry expertise is often essential, whether it's marketing
 and logistics expertise for consumer brands or geologists and engineers
 who can evaluate 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quality of rocks
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in oil and gas ventures.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Real estate and credit are special cases.
 Real estate delivers value to consumers through design.
 Real estate design is the province of architects and urban designers who
 study consumer preference and grasp how to merge a building with its commercial
 purpose as a well as environmental and social context.
 Time and time again, we see well designed buildings maintaining high occupancy
 and earning premium rents in markets that otherwise would be regarded as
 highly competitive.
 Employment trends, the tastes of millenials and impacts of technology are
 rapidly changing what constitutes good design and risks of obsolescence
 in real estate are high.
 Value strategies of investing in older buildings at discount prices need
 to be evaluated carefully.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Unlike equity strategies where value is created after the acquisition, credit
 strategies achieve their success mostly through their discipline and diligence
 in deciding whether or not to make a loan.
 Deep expertise in credit including industry coverage teams are essential
 to doing this well.
 Once the loan is made, the die is largely cast.
 Nevertheless, active monitoring is extremely important.
 Rapid action in addressing a deteriorating credit can improve recovery
 rates.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The final test of strategy is cusomer-centeredness.
 We started out by saying understanding strategy is similar to a firm grasp
 of the answer to how a firm earns its profits.
 If it's lucky or exploitive, it won't be sustainable.
 Firms have multiple consituencies and as firms mature, they evolve in how
 they embrace their responsibilities.
 For asset management firms, the first order customer is the asset owner
 which has entrusted them with a portion of their capital for management.
 The issues here are pretty straight-forward – the asset owner wants its
 money turned into more money together with some niceties like being kept
 informed on how things are going along the way, etc.
 More to come on this when we discuss terms in a later section.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To distinguish themselves, firms must serve a broader customer set.
 Private equity firms serve the management teams of the companies they own.
 A software industry investor adds value if it has an internal consulting
 team with expertise in software development and marketing.
 Such a firm becomes a preferred partner getting a last look in auctions
 or even having the chance to buy businesses 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

off market
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 A middle market credit firm adds value through its reputation for reliably
 closing and fair dealing when conditions evolve for better or worse.
 Such a firm can achieve premium pricing and hold firm on other terms and
 covenants.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Every firm has a critical internal customer set in the people who work there.
 This is the topic of the next section.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Organization
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Private markets investing is best thought of as a hiring decision.
 It isn't securities analysis.
 When Warren Buffet drinks a Coca Cola and reads their financial statements
 and decides he likes it, he then can buy the stock and Coca Cola is what
 he gets.
 You can analyze the prior track of a private equity firm all you want,
 but you don't get those deals.
 What you are evaluating is whether they have created a culture and process
 that adds value and assessing whether you think it is likely they will
 repeat that success.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You will start evaluating an organization simply by looking at the size
 and composition of the team.
 Is it big enough and does it contain the technical specialties necessary
 to implement the planned strategy.
 A relevant statistic is firm assets under management divided by employee
 headcount.
 From that information, you can calculate an estimate of the recurring revenue
 per employee.
 For firms with lower AUM per employee, less than $100 million, the business
 viability may not be sustainable with inadequate resources to support the
 strategy.
 For firms with high AUM per employee, one would ask whether the firm is
 investing enough in itself and whether ther may be too much outsourcing.
 The purpose of base asset management fees should be to support an organization
 well-resourced to implement the investment strategy.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Firm culture is the other main topic for examination.
 Founder leadership style establishes and guides the culture.
 In building a firm founders make a series of increasing selfless decisions.
 The first decision is to found the firm in the first place.
 The founders have a fire in their belly to pursue something reflecting
 their unique take on strategy and build something which is their own.
 This first 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

at bat
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is critical – if you don't have enough early success to attract capital
 and talent, the firm never really gets off the ground.
 As the firm progresses, the founders are then faced with the task of transition
ing from deal culture to firm culture.
 Leadership style at this point becomes critical.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the fun things about being an investor in private markets is the
 opportunity to meet many founders and observe how they manage this journey.
 The best managers deemphasize the culture of the founder in order to build
 the culture of the firm.
 Leaders in this style see leadership as service and to a significant degree
 an antonym to authority.
 They build a culture reflecting a philosophy and discipline of business
 practice and then trust the culture.
 Decisions and responsibility for them are entrusted to the team as their
 skills and experience grow.
 The founders don't hold themselves out as final decision makers.
 Instead they monitor that appropriate discipline was observed in making
 the decision and that feedback loops are present to appropriately measure
 the outcome of the decision and learn from those outcomes.
 Teamwork is emphasized.
 Every individual understands her role and does not let down her colleagues
 with substandard, incomplete or tardy work.
 People learn to trust each other in the integrity and professionalism of
 their work.
 Leadership in this context serves the firm, the employees and the culture.
 The leaders accept financial rewards only after taking care of the team
 first.
 They are quick to credit the team for their work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Compensation and employment terms are important.
 This is where the rubber hits the road.
 While it may be the case that employees will be loyal to firms that create
 a rich employment experience full of challenge, team comraderie and joy
 from shared experience of success, this only goes so and the firm will
 deteriorate if the riches created are not properly shared.
 Persons in authority who accept rewards from themselves without first taking
 care of their teams are failing as leaders and creating an intrinsically
 toxic environment.
 As the firm evolves, if will develop formalized and for more senior personnel
 contractual arrangements for sharing profit.
 Careers are emphasized and career conversations about what this job means
 to each person occur regularly.
 The uniqueness of individuals is a source of strength for the culture.
 Succession planning and ownership of the asset management firm need to
 be addressed well in advance of need both to protect investors and to complete
 the bond with the next generation of managers who will succeed the founders.
 The capital of an asset management firm is human capital and founders who
 do not properly share rewards and do not plan for succession are dissipating
 that capital.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Assessing these things is difficult but important.
 Typical investment arrangements with these firms involve fund lives of
 ten to fifteen years.
 One sees firms that disintegrate in that time frame and contractual protections
 rarely provide adequate remedies.
 I use a thought experiment to help myself with this decision – I have adult
 children and I ask myself if this firm is a place I would want them to
 work.
 Will they be continuously challenged with projects and duties of increasing
 complexity as their skills grow.
 Will they receive regular candid feedback and will they receive financial
 rewards commensurate with the value of their work.
 Will they advance in a career path suited to them providing opportunities
 for technical excellence or the chance lead a team or a business line.
 Will the culture, however demanding, avoid hazing rituals and allow them
 to grow as individuals with interests and relationships beyond work.
 If it's a good place to work where you'd be proud for your children to
 be associated with it, then it has a decent chance of surviving and thriving.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Track Record
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why do we look at track record? Luck and randomness are everywhere and just
 because a firm has done well, it is far from certain it will continue to
 do so.
 In public markets, there is some evidence that strategies that have recently
 done well will deteriorate.
 In private markets, the evidence for persistence of performance is, at
 best, equivocal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We understand all that, but care about track record anyway.
 We care about it because it is the one unfudgeable and unspinnable piece
 of evidence we have that might help us assess whether the firm has created
 a quality culture and is pursuing a robust strategy.
 What follows is a somewhat detailed explanation for calculating performance
 metrics for private equity style investments (where investments are illiquid
 and market timing is determined by an investment manager with a sequence
 of capital calls and distributions which are non-discretionary for the
 investor).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk1, echo=FALSE, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

require(knitcitations) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

bib=read.bibtex('pme.bib') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

source('pme functions.r')
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
A demonstration of various methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this post I will discuss traditional private equity performance measurements
 of IRR, TVPI and DPI and compare them to public market equivalent ("PME")
 methods.
 I provide code in R and an example data set to illustrate these calculations.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Traditional methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Comparing private equity performance to public markets presents technical
 challenges.
 The usual way to compare two investments is with time weighted returns.
 This works with liquid investments where the investor can choose which
 assets to own and in what weight.
 For example, you can use time weighted returns to properly compare the
 performance of large cap stocks with small cap stocks over whatever time
 frame or frames are of interest to you.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Private equity doesn't work the same way.
 PE investments are typically in the form of limited partnership interests
 with subscription agreements pursuant to which the financial sponsor has
 the right to control the amount and timing of capital which is called in
 to the partnership.
 So, the amount of capital deployed varies over time and the investor has
 no control over the timing of calls or distributions for the investment.
 In this context, time weighted return calculations are not useful in understand
ing the performance of a private equity investment because the variability
 in the amount of capital deployed in a particular will typically be very
 large.
 Some private equity sponsors and investors compare their IRR returns with
 time weighted market returns, but this practice makes no sense because
 of the cash flow patterns and varying amount of capital deployed.
 raditional private equity performance measurements 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The traditional performance metrics for private equity are DPI, TVPI and
 IRR.
 DPI stands for distributions as a percent of invested and is calculated
 as the sum of distributions received divided by the sum of capital contribution
s made.
 TVPI is "total value as a percent of invested" and calculates the "total
 value" as the sum of distributions plus the value of the unrealized assets
 still owned by the partnership divided, again, by the sum of the capital
 calls.
 IRR is the internal rate of return, customarily expressed as an annual
 interest rate, calculated on the cash flows with the capital calls expressed
 as negative numbers and including the final cash flow as part of the time
 series for the calculation.
 The first two calculations are straightforward.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These traditional measures collectively give a good sense of the performance
 of a particular PE investment and allow you to compare private equity investmen
ts to each other.
 Data services tracking private equity use a combination of these metrics
 to rank performance in "quartiles".
 They customarily group funds to control for market context in "vintages"
 based on the year the partnership began investing.
 So, a 2006 vintage fund which invested across the global financial crisis
 and earned a 10% IRR might be a top quartile performer for that vintage,
 while the same IRR would be below average for, say, a 2009 vintage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Public Market Equivalent methods 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Controlling for market context by vintage is useful but still crude because
 there is a lot of variability of patterns of calling and returning capital
 from fund to fund.
 A number of authors proposed methods for this, but Steve Kaplan and Antoinette
 Schoar wrote an influential article exploring private equity performance
 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
Sexpr{citep(bib[grep('Schoar',bib)])}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 .
 In this article they formulated a method for calculating private equity
 performance as a "public market equivalent" which we will refer to as KSPME.
 KSPME is calculated as ratio of benefits to costs and a value greater than
 1 indicates performance above the opportunity cost benchmark.
 The calculation is illustrated in the following formulas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The required data are a time series of capital calls 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$C_t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

, a time series distributions 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$D_t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

, a final value at time 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$n$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 of 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$V_n$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 and a time series of dividend adjusted market indices 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$M_t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 You calculate a future value factor as the ratio of the market index at
 time 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$n$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 divided by the index at prior times 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$t$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$FV_t=
\backslash
frac{M_n}{M_t}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You then multiply (pair-wise for each of the values) the future value factor
 times calls and distributions 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$C_{FV}=C_t * FV_t$$ ; $$D_{FV} = D_t * FV_t$$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You now have what you need to calculate
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$KSPME = 
\backslash
frac{
\backslash
Sigma D_{FV} + V_n}{
\backslash
Sigma C_{FV}}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
KSPME is a wealth measure reflecting how much extra money you have by investing
 in the private equity fund compared to an alternative public markets investment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
KSPME has some nice mathematical properties that allow it to be related
 to the capital asset pricing model.
 Gredil, Griffiths and Stucke have published an article that explores this
 relationship and proposes an additional metric, called "Direct Alpha",
 which is a measure expressed as an annual percent of outperformance of
 a private equity investment compared to a public market benchmark 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

`r citep(bib[1])`
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 It is calculated as the IRR of a time series constructed by combining the
 future value adjusted calls (as negative numbers), distributions and the
 final value.
 So, it uses exactly the same data as KSPME but with different calculations
 to reduce the data to a single measurement.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$Direct Alpha = 
\backslash
log{(1+IRR(-C_{FV},D_{FV},V_n))}$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you have an IRR of a private equity investment 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$IRR_{PE}$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 calculated as a discrete annual return, you can then calculate an 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$IRR_M$
\end_layout

\end_inset

 that you would have earned by investing in a market index with the same
 timing of investments and withdrawals as the calls and distributions of
 the private equity investment.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

$$
\backslash
log{(1+IRR_M)} = 
\backslash
log{(1+IRR_{PE})} - DirectAlpha$$
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
KSPME and Direct Alpha supplement the traditional private equity performance
 measures with mathematically rigourous methods consistent with the CAPM
 framework.
 KSPME provides a measure of how much additional wealth is gained with a
 private equity measurement.
 Direct Alpha tells you the rate at which the additional wealth is accumulated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Illustration of calculations of private equity performance measurements
 in R
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We work from a hypothetical data set of private equity cash flows and valuations
 with dates for each entry, an identifier for the fund of each entry and
 a variable "type" valued as "C" for cash flows and "V" for values.
 This data set has entries for four funds.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk2, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(tseries) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(zoo) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=read.csv('pedata.csv') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata$date=as.Date(pedata$date,format='%m/%d/%Y') 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

unique(pedata$fund) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

head(pedata)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now want to calculate a combined cash flow and valuation for the portfolio
 of four funds by summing the cash flows which occur on the same day.
 We add this to the data set using the name 'Total' as though it were an
 additional fund of that name.
 Note we separate the values from the cash flows in case there is a cash
 flow on the same data as a valuation.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=split(pedata,pedata$type) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

total.c=data.frame(fund="Total",
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		aggregate(value~date,pedata$C,sum),type="C")
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

total.v=data.frame(fund="Total",
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		aggregate(value~date,pedata$V,sum),type="V")  
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=rbind(pedata$C,pedata$V,total.c,total.v) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

tail(pedata)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@ 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now we download the Russell 2000 index from Yahoo finance.
 We fill in missing days from the last market day in the second line of
 code.
 Values on weekends and holidays and holidays are needed because of the
 accounting convetion to quote fund values on the last day of a calendar
 quarter.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk3, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

r2k=get.hist.quote('^RUT',min(pedata$date)-5,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		max(pedata$date)+5, quote='AdjClose',
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		provider='yahoo',retclass='zoo',quiet=TRUE)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

r2k=na.locf(merge(r2k,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

		zoo(,seq(start(r2k),end(r2k),by='day')),all=TRUE))
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@ 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The variable 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{r2k}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 is returned from 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{get.hist.quote}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 as a 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{zoo}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 object.
 We convert it to a data frame with a variable name for the date value that
 matches the date value variable name in the private equity data set.
 We can then 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{merge}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 it with the private equity data set so that each entry in the data set
 has its related market index value.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk7>>= 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

r2k=data.frame(date=time(r2k),index=as.numeric(r2k)) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pedata=merge(pedata,r2k) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

head(pedata)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We now 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{split}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 the data set in to a list of data frames, one for each fund and the total
 portfolio.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk6>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

pelist=split(pedata,pedata$fund) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

names(pelist) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@ 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I've written a function called 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{pe.performance}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 which processes data in the format of each of the data frames in 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
texttt{pelist}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 The code for all the functions used in this post are listed at the end
 of the post.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You can calculate the performance statistics and present them in a table
 as follows 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk5>>=
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats=lapply(pelist,pe.performance) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats.df=data.frame(lapply(stats,unlist)) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

round(stats.df,3) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@  
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here is an example of a way to plot the results.
 The x axis is the market return, as if invested in Russell 2000.
 The y axis is the fund return.
 A line is provided with slope of 1 and intercept through the origin.
 Funds above this line have outperformed their public market benchmark.
 The fund names are printed in a color code indicating the value of KSPME
 for the fund.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

<<chunk4, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, fig.width=10,fig.height=7,tidy=FALSE>>=
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats.df2=as.data.frame(t(as.matrix(stats.df)))
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

stats.df2=data.frame(name=colnames(stats.df),stats.df2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

library(ggplot2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

ggplot(stats.df2,aes(x=ind.irr,y=irr,label=name,colour=kspme))+
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	geom_text()+
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	xlab("Market Return")+ 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	ylab("Fund IRR")+ 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	geom_abline(intercept=0,slope=1)+ 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

	ggtitle("Private Equity Performance")
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout

@
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code

\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Terms
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Summary and Conclusion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Optional Section Concerning Computer Code for Quantitative Methods
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
